



Virtualized Conversations                                   J. Rosenberg
Internet-Draft                                               jdrosen.net
Intended status: Informational                         29 September 2026
Expires: 2 April 2027


            Use Cases and Requirements for Redaction in VCON
                 draft-rosenberg-vcon-redaction-latest

Abstract

   The Virtualized Conversations (VCON) specification defines a
   standardized object format for representing multimedia conversations
   between users and AI agents.  Recent work has expanded VCON to enable
   it to been used to capture sessions with AI Agents as well, including
   tool calls, reasoning steps, model configuration and more.  This has
   also expanded the set of use cases and requirements for redaction of
   sensitive information from a VCON.  This document outlines use cases
   and requirements for redaction in VCONs.  This document is meant for
   discusssion purposes.  All of this document was written by the author
   and not by an LLM.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://jdrosen.github.io/vcon-redaction/draft-rosenberg-vcon-
   redaction.html.  Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rosenberg-vcon-redaction/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Virtualized
   Conversations Working Group mailing list (mailto:vcon@ietf.org),
   which is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/vcon/.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/vcon/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/jdrosen/vcon-redaction.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 2 April 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Redaction Support in VCON
     2.1.  Redaction Properties
       2.1.1.  Signaled or Unsignaled
       2.1.2.  Positioning and Participant Indications
       2.1.3.  Detectable and Undetectable Redaction
       2.1.4.  Information Tagging vs. Redaction
   3.  Redaction Methodologies for VCON Audio and Video Dialogs
     3.1.  Full Dialog Object Removal
     3.2.  Dialog Object Content Removal
     3.3.  Dialog Object Content Substitution
   4.  Redaction of Text
     4.1.  Well-Known Character Substitution
     4.2.  Information Substitution
   5.  Requirements for VCON Extensions
     5.1.  Explicit Positional and Participant Redaction Indicators
     5.2.  Explicit Text Redaction Element
     5.3.  Explicit Information Identication Element
   6.  AI Authorship Considerations
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The Virtualized Conversations (VCON) specification [VCON] defines a
   standardized object format for representing multimedia conversations
   between users and AI agents.  Recent work HOWE [VAC] [RESTRUCTURE]
   has expanded VCON to enable it to be used to capture sessions with AI
   Agents as well, including tool calls, reasoning steps, model
   configuration and more.  This has also expanded the set of use cases
   and requirements for redaction of sensitive information from a VCON.
   This document outlines use cases and requirements for redaction in
   VCONs.  This document is meant for discusssion purposes.  No AI was
   used in the creation of this document.

2.  Redaction Support in VCON

   The VCON specification itself provides support for redaction in a
   singular fashion.  It allows a VCON to reference a prior instance of
   a VCON which was unredacted.  This is accomplished through the
   "redacted" object defined in Section 4.1.8 of [VCON].

   Beyond this, the specification says that specific methods for
   redaction of text, audio, and video are out of scope for the
   document.

   This document considers what those methods could be.

2.1.  Redaction Properties

   There are several different properties of redaction systems.  These
   properties largely define what information still remains after the
   redaction has ocurred.

2.1.1.  Signaled or Unsignaled

   Firstly, redaction can be signaled or unsignaled.  In signaled
   redaction, there is some kind of indication - meant for processing by
   software - which indicates that redaction has occurred.  In
   unsignaled, there is no such indication meant for processing by
   software.  The distinction of "meant for processing by software" is
   important in this definition.  It means that there is something like
   a field in a JSON document, a flag or tag or other piece of
   information which conveys the fact that redaction has occurred.  In
   the current VCON specification, the redacted field is the property
   which provides a way for redaction to be signaled.

2.1.2.  Positioning and Participant Indications

   Redaction operations can provide a positioning indication.  A
   positioning indication is information that remains post-redaction
   that indicates where the redaction occurred.  For audio and video
   streams, this is the start and stop timestamps where the redaction
   ocurrred.  For textual streams, it is the exact text which was
   redacted in the chat sequence.  For events, like a tool call, it is
   the exact position in the event - the tool call input or output for
   example - which was removed.

   Redaction operations can provide a participant indication.  A
   participant indication is relevant only for conversational elements -
   audio, video or chat - and it indicates the participant that was
   redacted.

   By definition, if a VCON has positioning or participant indications,
   the VCON has signaled redaction.

   What are the use cases where we want to redact sensitive information
   but retain positional and/or participant indicators? in something
   like a contact center call, we want to remove PCI, but wish to retain
   positional and participant indicators for troubleshooting purposes.
   It is very common in contact centers for managers to review calls
   after the fact, and use the conversation to adjust many aspects of
   how both human and AI agents support customers.  Another use case is
   for PII redaction, where we want to anonymize the conversation but
   don't need to hide the fact that redaction has ocurred.  In such
   cases, we would want positional indicators, but not participant
   indicators.

2.1.3.  Detectable and Undetectable Redaction

   In the case of audiovisual content, redaction can be characterized as
   detectable or undetectable, which indicates whether a human being (or
   perhaps a model which is processing the content as a human might) -
   through observation of that content - would be able to determine that
   redaction has occurred.  For example, if a user speaks their social
   security number, and it is "beeped" over within the recording itself,
   then a human could determine that redaction has occurred by listening
   to the audio, and noting the beep as a clear indicator that there has
   been information redaction.  In video content, there might be rapid
   fadeout to black.  In image content, there might be a black box
   pasted over an image.

   To make audiovisual redaction undetectable, it needs to be
   substituted with something which sounds or looks appropriate to a
   human observer.  This is generall quite difficult to do.  For
   example, if a user speaks their social security number to an agent,
   one could use a text-to-speech model to generate an alternative, fake
   social security number, using the voice of the user.  In other words,
   apply a "deepfake" technology to alter the content in such a way that
   it is generally undetectable.

   There are different use cases for how much information we want to
   remove, and how much we want to retain in the document.  For highly
   sensitive redactions, such as when a witness needs to be protected
   and their presence utterly removed from a conversation - it is
   desirable to make the redaction undetectable, with no remaining
   positional or participant indications.

2.1.4.  Information Tagging vs. Redaction

   A close cousin to redaction is information tagging.  In information
   tagging, sensitive information - such as PII - are tagged explicitly
   in the document or object.  By tagging it, downstream consumers of
   the document can hide the information - or not - depending on the
   user that is viewing it.  This relies on trust between the
   transmitter of the document, and the recipient.  Namely, it requires
   that the transmitter trust the recipient to perform the information
   hiding appropriately based on the user that is viewing it.

   A common use case for this is in the contact center.  A normal human
   contact center agent reviewing a call may not have permissions to see
   the name and address of the user in the transcript of the call,
   should they view that transcript.  However, someone from the security
   and compliance team, might have such permission.

3.  Redaction Methodologies for VCON Audio and Video Dialogs

   This section discusses the techniques which can be applied to a VCON
   to achieve different types of redaction.  Redaction methodologies for
   audio and video are more complex than those for text, due to the
   obvious difficulities in manipluation of the content.

3.1.  Full Dialog Object Removal

   The simplest way to redact audiovisual information in a VCON is to
   remove the dialog object containing that information entirely from
   the VCON.  In this approach, there is no trace whatsoever that this
   dialog existed in the VCON.  This removal changes the index for any
   other dialogs in the VCON, which might require updating of references
   to that dialog from other objects, such as an analysis or
   participant.

   Full object removal only makes sense if the VCON was structured as a
   sequence of dialogs, each representing a temporal segment of the
   conversation.  For example, if each turn of a conversation was
   represented in a singular dialog.  If a user spoke their social
   security number in a specific turn, the dialog representing that turn
   could be removed from the VCON.

   Full object removal may result in a "hole" in the sequence of dialogs
   where no audiovisual information is present, making it potentially
   detectable.  Whether it is detectable or not depends on how the
   dialogs were structured and on the nature of the conversation being
   captured.  If the VCON had a set of dialogs, each representing a one-
   minute interval of audio mixed from all participants, then removing
   of one of the dialogs results in a VCON in which redaction is easily
   detectable - there will be a notable silence in the audio.  However,
   if the VCON had a series of dialogs, each representing the audio
   contribution of a single speaker for a one-minute portion of time (or
   perhaps a single turn), then it might be detectable, or might not.
   If it was a conversation between a user and an AI agent, and the
   user's utterance is removed, the conversation would clearly sound
   like it was missing something.  For example -

   AI Agent: What is your social security number?  AI Agent: Got it,
   thanks

   A user listening to this audio sequence would know something was
   missing, making the redaction detectable.

   However, in a less structured meeting, where it is possible there was
   no direct response to a user's utterance of redacted information, it
   may not be detectable.

   Full dialog object removal does not have positional or participant
   indications, making this approach problematic for cases where
   positional and participant indications are desirable.

3.2.  Dialog Object Content Removal

   In this approach, the content of the Dialog object - present either
   in the body element or the url and content_hash - is removed from the
   VCON, but the Dialog object itself and its meta-data (including
   parties, start and duration), remain.  We call this a Dialog object
   "shell".

   Like full dialog object removal, this approach makes sense of the
   VCON was structured as a sequence of dialogs, each representing a
   temporal segment of the conversation.  For example, if each turn of a
   conversation was represented in a singular dialog.  If a user spoke
   their social security number in a specific turn, the dialog
   representing that turn could be converted to just a shell.

   Unlike full dialog object removal, there is no change in the index of
   the dialog that was redacted, eliminating the need to potentially
   update references elsewhere in the VCON.

   Also unlike full dialog object removal, content removal can be
   accompanied by positional indicators (if the start and duration
   elements are preserved) and participant indicators (if the parties
   element is preserved).  This makes this approach useful for many
   applications.  However, it has a hard requirement that the VCON be
   structured in a way facilitating removal of content from a single
   dialog.  For calls between a consumer and an AI agent, it would
   require per speaker, per-turn dialog elements.  Even then, redaction
   of an entire turn might cause loss of information which is desirable
   for downstream troubleshooting and management purposes.  Consider
   this conversation -

   AI Agent: How can I help you today?  User: Yeah, so my name is
   Jonathan Rosenberg and my account number is 12345.  I ordered a
   widget 2000 like a month back and it still hasn't shown up.  The
   website is showing it shipped but it has said that for a while and
   there is no Fedex tracking number.  What's going on?

   In this case, the user turn contains PII information (the user's name
   and account number), but it also contains critical information - the
   intent of the caller and context of the removal.  If the dialog
   content is removed, the audio is lost.  Now, this might be acceptable
   if there was an accompanying transcript in an analysis object.  The
   entire audio turn could be redacted, and then just the two PII
   elements from the transcript.  The alternative is to perform content
   substitution, noted below.

3.3.  Dialog Object Content Substitution

   In this approach, the content of the dialog object is replaced with
   something else.  For audio, this might be a "beep" sound.  For video,
   it might be a recorded video of a black screen.  More interestingly,
   the content can be substituted for one in which the "beep" or video
   overlay only occur in a portion of the content.  For example,
   consider a Dialog containing recorded audio covering 20 minutes of a
   call.  At timestamp 3:41 the user said their social security number
   and it took 3 seconds to speak it.  During the interval 3:41 to 3:44,
   the audio is replaced by an audible "beep".

   Content substitution is detectable.  However, in the current VCON
   specification, there is no explicit indication that the substitution
   has happened.  There is no positional or participant indicators
   either.

   This is a gap in the specification.

4.  Redaction of Text

   Text content can be present in dialog objects, containing emails or
   chat messages.  It can also be present in events, such as a tool call
   request, a tool call response, or even in reasoning outputs.  It can
   be present the Analysis object, inside of a transcript or summary of
   a dialog element.

   There are several ways to perform redaction of text within VCON.

4.1.  Well-Known Character Substitution

   The simplest technique is to just substitute the sensitive
   information with some kind of alternative well-known characters -
   "XXX" being quite common.  Sometimes, the word "REDACTED" is used as
   well.

   Well Known Character substitution is effective and easy to implement.
   It is detectable.

   It's main drawback is that, as a positional indicator, it can lead to
   false positives.  Consider the following interesting conversation -

   AI Agent: What is your three letter confirmation code?  User: Yes, it
   is XXX.  AI Agent: Thanks, let me look it up.

   Here is the interesting question - was the user's confirmation code
   actually XXX, or was it something else, and there was a redaction
   operation which substituted the real confirmation code?

   This perhaps seems contrived, but it is even more complex in cases
   where the redaction occurred over text that was the result of speech
   recognition.  Consider this example -

   AI Agent: What is your three letter confirmation code?  User: Hang
   on, umm, OK.  Its XXX, then YKZ.  AI Agent: Thanks, let me look it
   up.

   In this case, is the user's confirmation code XXXYKZ, or has some
   kind of partial redaction taken place?  There is no way to know.

   This is perhaps improved by using a word like REDACTED, but again can
   lead to confusion if the participants in a conversation actually use
   that word!  Consider this conversation -

   User 1: Did you try reading the document?  User 2: Yes I did, but the
   account number was redacted.

   In this conversation - did user 2 speak the account number, but then
   it was subsequently redacted?  Or did they say the word "redacted"?

   There is another problem that the word "redacted" is in English,
   making it difficult to parse in VCON represented conversations in a
   different language.

   All of these problems stem from the fact that character substitution
   is not actually part of the schema of the VCON at all - its a hint.
   As a hint, is ambiguous in some cases.  If we want software to be
   able to know that redaction has ocurred, we want to do better.

4.2.  Information Substitution

   An alternative solution is to replace a piece of information - like a
   social security number or name - with an alternative that is
   incorrect, but plausible.  For example, using the name "John Smith"
   or a social security number like "183-13-3948".  To perform this
   substitution, software requires knowlede about the type of
   information element, and needs some kind of algorithm to perform
   substitution.

   This approach is similar to well-known character substitution.
   However, when done well, it can produce redaction which is
   undetectable.  In some use cases, that is highly desirable.  In
   others, it may be very bad.  Using a contact center call as an
   example, consider a user that chats with a contact center agent to
   get a refund.  The account number is recorded into the VCON for the
   call at the end, and then replaced using information substitution.
   The user calls back the next day.  A human contact center agent
   reviews the transcript of the prior chat session, and observes the
   account number in the prior transcript.  Not knowing that this is
   actually NOT the correct account number, the agent uses the wrong
   account number and applies the refund to the wrong account.

5.  Requirements for VCON Extensions

   Based on the discussion in this document, there are a number of gaps
   in the VCON specification which would be good to address.  Two stand
   out.

5.1.  Explicit Positional and Participant Redaction Indicators

   In cases where audiovisual dialog content has undergone substitution
   (e.g., the "beep" sound in an audio track), it would be desireable to
   have a property within the dialog object that explicity indicates the
   points in time (start and duration) that contain these beeps.  That
   would address the limitation that, without this, there is no clear
   positional or participant indicators.  THose indicators are highly
   useful for troubleshooting purposes.

5.2.  Explicit Text Redaction Element

   Instead of using XXX or the word REDACTED or similar, it would be
   good to standardize a way for any text string - present anywhere in
   the body of the VCON - to have a standardized way of indicating that
   some kind of redaction has ocurred.  A good way to do this is by
   adding the idea of a redaction manifest, which allows a string
   anywhere in the document to be replaced by a reference to a
   standardized object which supports a mix of text and redacted
   information.  Consider a simple VCON showing a single event - a tool
   call - which closes an account (using the event concept defined in
   [RESTRUCTURE]).

   {
     "events" : [
       {
         "type" : "tool-call",
         "tool_name" : "close_account_by_id",
         "input-params" : [
           {
             "input-name" : "account_id",
             "input-value" : "293827344"
           }
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

   You can see that this contains a sensitive account ID.  Here is a
   version that is now redacted.

   {
     "events" : [
       {
         "type" : "tool-call",
         "tool_name" : "close_account_by_id",
         "input-params" : [
           {
             "input-name" : "account_id",
             "input-value" : "__REDACTED_REF_001"
           }
         ]
       }
     ],
     "redactions" : [
       "name" : "__REDACTED_REF_001",
       "type" : "account_number"
     ]
   }

   You can see that, we've added a redactions element into the JSON
   which contains the list of redacted fields, including specification
   of their types.

5.3.  Explicit Information Identication Element

   There is no way in VCOn to take a piece of information - like a first
   name or social security number - and then explicitly tag it as a
   piece of sensitive information, without removing it from the document
   per se.

   This can be done along much the same lines as the text redaction
   element noted above.

6.  AI Authorship Considerations

   All of the text in this document was written by hand, without AI
   assistance.  AI was used to analyze options for redacting text
   strings in a JSON document without needing to modify the schema of
   the document.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document is entirely about security - focused on information
   privacy through redaction.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  Informative References

   [BIRK]     Birkholz, H., Heldt, T., and O. Steele, "Verifiable Agent
              Conversation Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-01, 31
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-01>.

   [HOWE]     McCarthy-Howe, T., "vCon Agent Session", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-howe-vcon-agent-session-00, 20 May
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-howe-
              vcon-agent-session-00>.

   [RESTRUCTURE]
              Rosenberg, J., "Virtualized Conversations (VCON)
              Restructure to Facilitate AI Agent Use Cases", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-rosenberg-vcon-
              restructure-00, 11 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-rosenberg-
              vcon-restructure-00>.

   [VAC]      Birkholz, H., Heldt, T., and O. Steele, "Verifiable Agent
              Conversation Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-01, 31
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-01>.

   [VCON]     Petrie, D., "The JSON format for vCon - Conversation Data
              Container", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              vcon-vcon-core-04, 7 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-vcon-
              vcon-core-04>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO.

Author's Address

   Jonathan Rosenberg
   jdrosen.net
   Email: jdrosen@jdrosen.net
